Updated the react quickstart in the docs (#126)
teamhanko/docs: quickstarts/frontend/react.mdx

description: Learn how to quickly add authentication and user profile in your React app using Hanko.
---

## Create a React application

To setup our React Frontend we will use [vite](https://vite.dev/) as a build tool.

Run the following command to [create a new Vite React application](https://vite.dev/guide/):

<CodeGroup>
```bash npm
npm create vite@latest project-name -- --template react-ts
```

```bash pnpm
pnpm create vite project-name --template react-ts
```

```bash bun
bun create vite project-name --template react-ts
```

```bash yarn
yarn create vite project-name --template react-ts
``` 

</CodeGroup>

## Install `@teamhanko/hanko-elements`

Once you've initialized your React app, installing hanko-elements provides you with access to the prebuilt components: `hanko-auth` and `hanko-profile`.

> We will also install the `react-router-dom` , this will allow us to navigate trough pages / routes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will also install the `react-router-dom`, this will allow us to navigate trough pages / routes.
```

<CodeGroup>
```bash npm
cd project-name
npm install @teamhanko/hanko-elements react-router-dom
``` 

```bash pnpm
cd project-name
pnpm add @teamhanko/hanko-elements react-router-dom
```

```bash bun
cd project-name
bun add @teamhanko/hanko-elements react-router-dom
```

```bash yarn
cd project-name
yarn add @teamhanko/hanko-elements react-router-dom
```

</CodeGroup>

## Setup your Hanko project
Go to the [Hanko console](https://cloud.hanko.io/) and [create a project for this application.](/setup-hanko-cloud)

<Note>
  During creation make sure to input the URL you will be developing on as the `APP URL`.
  (Most likely http://localhost:5173/) \
\
  If you already have a project you can change the URL at:\

>   `'your project' > Settings > URLs > App URL`.

Reviewer: The same as in the nextjs guide. I think this guide should be tailored to new users, that typically doesn't have an account already.

</Note>

## Add the Hanko API URL

Retrieve the API URL from the [Hanko console](https://cloud.hanko.io/) and place it in your [.env file](https://vite.dev/guide/env-and-mode).

```sh .env
VITE_HANKO_API_URL=https://f4****-4802-49ad-8e0b-3d3****ab32.hanko.io
```

<Note>
  If you are self-hosting you need to provide the URL of your running Hanko
  backend.
</Note>

## Create Hanko components

> Lets create a folder called `components` and create two files, `HankoAuth.tsx` and `HankoProfile.tsx`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a folder called `components` and create two files in it, `HankoAuth.tsx` and `HankoProfile.tsx`.
```

> Both of these components use the Hanko client from [@teamhanko/hanko-elements](/guides/hanko-elements/introduction).

Reviewer: I don't think we need this here, IMO does not add any value to the guide.
```suggestion
```

### Typescript

To get these elements to work with typescript, currently we must add the types to the project.

> You can do this by creating a file called `custom.d.ts` and placing this in your apps root / src folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do do this, create a file called `custom.d.ts` and place it in your apps root / src folder.
```

```jsx src/custom.d.ts
import { HankoAuthElementProps, HankoProfileElementProps, HankoEventsElementProps } from "@teamhanko/hanko-elements";

declare module "react" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface IntrinsicElements {
        "hanko-auth": HankoAuthElementProps;
        "hanko-login": HankoAuthElementProps;
        "hanko-registration": HankoAuthElementProps;
        "hanko-profile": HankoProfileElementProps;
        "hanko-events": HankoEventsElementProps;
    }
  }
}
```

### Hanko Auth

> Here we subscribe to the `onSessionCreated` [event](/guides/hanko-elements/using-frontend-sdk#events), this triggers when a user successfully logs in. You can use these event to perform any desired action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Hanko Auth

Now lets setup the `HankoAuth.tsx` file to create a functioning login page.

Here we subscribe to the `onSessionCreated` [event](/guides/hanko-elements/using-frontend-sdk#events), this triggers when a user successfully logs in. You can use these event to perform any desired action (e.g. redirect to your dashboard).
```

```jsx components/HankoAuth.tsx
import { useEffect, useCallback, useMemo } from "react";
import { useNavigate } from 'react-router-dom';
import { register, Hanko } from "@teamhanko/hanko-elements";

const hankoApi = import.meta.env.VITE_HANKO_API_URL;
 
export default function HankoAuth() {
  const navigate = useNavigate();
 
  const hanko = useMemo(() => new Hanko(hankoApi), []);
 
  const redirectAfterLogin = useCallback(() => {
    // redirect to a page in your application
    navigate("/dashboard");
  }, [navigate]);

  useEffect(
    () =>
      hanko?.onSessionCreated(() => {
       //succesfully logged in
        redirectAfterLogin();
      }),
    [hanko, redirectAfterLogin]
  );
 
  useEffect(() => {
    register(hankoApi).catch((error) => {
      // handle error
      console.log(error)
    });
  }, []);
 
  return <hanko-auth/>;
}
```

Now simply import the component you just created.

```jsx pages/loginPage.tsx
import HankoAuth from "../components/HankoAuth";

export default function LoginPage() {
  return (
      <HankoAuth/>
  );
}
```

### Hanko profile

After setting up the HankoAuth lets Setup the `HankoProfile.jsx` file to create an interface where users can

> manage their `Password` , `Email Addresses`, `Passkeys`, `Security Keys`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After setting up the HankoAuth let's set up the `HankoProfile.jsx` file to create an interface where users can
manage their `Email Addresses` and credentials.
```

Create `LogoutButton.tsx` and insert the code below.

  ```jsx components/LogoutButton.tsx
  import { useState, useEffect } from "react";
  import { useNavigate } from "react-router-dom";
  import { Hanko } from "@teamhanko/hanko-elements";

  const hankoApi = import.meta.env.VITE_HANKO_API_URL;

  function LogoutBtn() {
    const navigate = useNavigate();
    const [hanko, setHanko] = useState<Hanko>();

    useEffect(() => {
      import("@teamhanko/hanko-elements").then(({ Hanko }) =>
        setHanko(new Hanko(hankoApi ?? ""))
      );
    }, []);

    const logout = async () => {
      try {
        await hanko?.logout();

        navigate("/"); //Path to naviage to once the user logs out.

      } catch (error) {
        console.error("Error during logout:", error);
      }
    };

    return <button onClick={logout}>Logout</button>;
  }

  export default LogoutBtn;
  ```

## Customize component styles

You can customize the appearance of `hanko-auth` and `hanko-profile` components using CSS variables and parts. Refer to our [customization guide](/guides/hanko-elements/customize-appearance).

## Securing routes

> To secure our routes we can await a fetch request to a running [Hanko Backend](/quickstarts/backend/node) to validate our session token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To secure our routes we should validate the session token at the backend. Please refer to our [backend guides](/quickstarts/backend).
```

Lets set up a Private route to do this for us.
Create a new React component at `components/PrivateRoute.tsx`.

> If the backend couldnt validate our token we get navigated back to `/`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the backend couldn't validate our token we get navigated back to `/`.
```
